**Confidently Hedonistic -- Nozick’s Exerience Machine, Hedonism, and Confident Attitudinal Pleasures \[working title\].**

**Johnny Hartz Søraker & Emiliano Heyns\
Department of Philosophy\
University of Twente**

The classic thought experiment by Nozick (1974) purportedly demonstrates
that our deeply held intuitions about what should count as valuable in
life rules out hedonism in its various forms as a plausible account of
human well-being. If it is the case that something matters to us in
addition to experience, as the Experience Machine (EM) thought
experiment is supposed to demonstrate, then a theory of well-being that
cannot account for this must be erroneous or incomplete. In this essay
we will argue that the intuitions evoked by the EM are not inconsistent
with hedonism as a plausible and complete account of human well-being,
but rather call for revisions that can render a more substantive and
less counter-intuitive form of hedonism. As such, this chapter
exemplifies the idea of reflective equilibrium [@daniels_reflectiveequilibrium_2011], as
characterized by @rawls_theoryjusticerevised_1999 by taking the intuitions evoked by EM and
critically refining hedonism accordingly – and thereby also shedding
light on what it is that the EM reveals about our intuitions.

We will propose that hedonism can be revised in two ways. First, as
suggested \[?\] by Fred Feldman’s *Intrinsic Attitudinal Hedonism,* we
need to move from a sensory to an attitudinal account of pleasure, one
in which hedonism is not a question of “being pleased by” (sensory
pleasure) but rather “taking pleasure in” (attitudinal pleasure).
Second, the issue of whether pleasures are “false” or not needs to be
reframed in terms of the confidence we have concerning that in which we
take pleasure. The problem with the experience machine is not that the
pleasures are objectively false in one way or another, but that we have
a hard time being confident about taking pleasure in something that does
not conform to our often confused ideas about what it means to be “real”
and “true”. We will conclude by discussing how the EM still brings forth
important insights about the role that virtual worlds and experiences
ought to have in our lives, as well as some implications for virtual
worlds and other current technologies that resemble the EM.

**The Experience Machine Intuition and Hedonism**

The Experience Machine can be read as one of many arguments – often
referred to as arguments from false pleasures[^1] – that purport to
demonstrate the counter-intuitive nature of any subjectivist theory of
well-being that regards our well-being as entirely determined by our
subjective mental states. These arguments try to show, typically by way
of intuition, that if, all else being equal, x produces more pleasure
than y, but any reasonable person would still choose y over x, then
there must be something about y that makes it more valuable despite
being less pleasure-inducing. In other words, there must be more to
well-being than pleasure alone, so hedonism must be incorrect or
incomplete as a theory of well-being. The EM and other arguments from
false pleasures are structured roughly as follows. The crux of the
argument lies in premise 2, which is the intuition that the EM seeks to
evoke :

[^1]: Another thought experiment about false pleasures that yields very
    similar intuitions is “the deceived businessman”. In this thought
    experiment, the problem is not that the world in which I live does
    not really exist but rather that the states of affairs from which a
    businessman derives well-being (e.g. his wife and children loving
    him) do not really exist, i.e. he is simply deceived and they are
    not true \[source? You need to describe the whole thought
    experiment, for readers wh have never come across it.\].

1.  <span id="h.30j0zll" class="anchor"></span>Hedonism states that
    subjective pleasure is the only thing of intrinsic value for the
    well-being of a person

2.  Pleasures which correspond to facts in the world are more valuable
    than pleasures for which the facts in which they are thought to
    originate do not obtain

2 3. Therefore, something other than subjective pleasure is
intrinsically valuable

1, 3 4. Therefore, hedonism is false

Although we will argue below that the implications for hedonism do not
necessarily follow, that is not to say that nothing should be learned
from these intuitions. On the contrary, the intuitions they evoke
largely point us in the right direction, and will later be used to
develop a new version of hedonism that is largely compatible with the
intuitions evoked by the thought experiments of Nozick and others.
Before doing this, we need to get a clearer idea of what it is that the
experience machine purports to demonstrate, what it actually does
demonstrate, and what the implications really are for a theory of
well-being.

First, and most fundamentally, do the intuitions that the Experience
Machine elicits actually indicate a Truth preference about the grounding
of our experiences? Kolber proposes a reversed Experience Machine where,
instead of being asked whether you would consider plugging in, you are
asked whether you would plug out. You are told “you are not \[fill in
your name\], you only think you are \[your name\]. Get off the machine
and you will be who you really are, John Doe” [@kolber_mentalstatismexperience_1994, 15]. If
Nozick’s conclusion holds, the answer should be unequivocal; the person
that is actually John Doe should want to leave.

@debrigard_ifyouit_2010 operationalized this reverse thought experiment,
casting doubt on the unequivocal response Nozick predicts (even though
it should be noted that sample size of the experiment was small, and
perhaps not representative of how the general public would respond). In
his experimental setup, de Brigard offers three scenarios, or
“vignettes” as he calls them; a Neutral, a Negative, and a Positive
vignette. In each of the scenarios you are confronted by an agent with
the surprising message that you have for the past years been plugged
into an Experience Machine due to an administrative error. You are
informed that “your life outside is not at all like the life you have
experienced so far,” and in the case of the Negative and the Positive
vignettes, respectively, you are told additionally that “in reality you
are a prisoner in a maximum security prison in West Virginia,” and “in
reality you are a multimillionaire artist living in Monaco.”,
respectively [@debrigard_ifyouit_2010, 47-49]. The question is whether you
would prefer to leave now.

In the Positive vignette, response was approximately 50–50 between
respondents. In the Negative vignette, the response showed an
overwhelmingly strong preference to stay in the Experience Machine. In
the Neutral vignette, there was a significant preference to stay
connected — and interestingly, the respondents who opted out of the
Experience Machine more often reported a preference for the “second
chance” aspect of leaving than they did report a reality preference. All
of this points towards a life based in falsity not necessarily being the
worse life.

De Brigard points out that both readings of the Experience Machine can
adequately be explained by what @samuelson_statusquobias_1988 call a
“status quo bias”. In cases where the disadvantages of a change are more
easily imagined than the advantages, “the disadvantages of change loom
larger than the advantages” [@kahneman_anomaliesendowmenteffect_1991, 200].
This certainly would seem to be the case for Nozick’s Experience
Machine; hardly any subject being posed the thought experiment will have
any experience that would extrapolate into a thorough imagining of being
in the Experience Machine. In De Brigard’s reading however, most
subjects will readily know what it would be like to have simply lived
their lives, and whether they did so inside the Experience Machine or
not will not enter the picture.

Despite these problems, the EM has captured the imagination of many and
there seems to be an important grain of truth captured by the idea that
the good life cannot be grounded on falsities, illusions, and delusions.
Whether conclusive or not, this intuition would at least prevent many
from subscribing to 1) a theory that bases well-being entirely on the
*experience* of pleasure as well as 2) a theory in which truth does not
have a role to play at all. In the following sections we will argue that
hedonism can be modified in such a way that both requirements can be met
– resulting in a hedonist theory in which well-being is not entirely
determined by *experienced* pleasure and where truth does have a role,
albeit indirectly. On the first point we will in the following section
largely follow the lead of Fred Feldman’s so-called Intrinsic
Attitudinal Hedonism (hereafter IAH). On the second, we will *criticize*
Feldman’s suggested “adjustment for truth” and instead propose
“adjustment for confidence”.

**\
**

**Pleasure and Well-being: From default hedonism to Feldman’s ‘Intrinsic
Attitudinal Hedonism’**

Let us first turn to the question of whether hedonism only allows for
experienced pleasure to determine well-being – which would also entail,
at least implicitly, that it does not matter what it is that causes the
experienced pleasure. As Feldman argues, hedonism does not need to be so
narrow, and the EM and other familiar objections against hedonism can be
largely dealt with by treating pleasures as attitudes rather than
sensations. On an attitudinal view, hedonism states that your well-being
is determined not by pleasures that you *experience* but rather anything
that you *take pleasure in.* This is a more reflective,
all-things-considered notion of pleasure where your well-being is
determined by that in which you take pleasure, which allows us to make
sense of how we can take pleasure in the experience of pain and how we
can be pained by (or “take pain in”) the experience of pleasure.

Although sensory and attitudinal pleasures are often equivalent (when
one is taking pleasure in having a pleasurable sensation) there are a
number of sensory pleasures that are not attitudinal pleasures, and vice
versa. For instance, I can be pained by the belief that the pleasure
that I am experiencing will lead to pain (e.g. some types of drugs), I
can be pained by the belief that the pleasure is becoming less intense
(e.g. that I have become habituated to the pleasure), I can be pained by
the belief that the sensory pleasure I am feeling was brought about by
being unethical (e.g. if I have stolen something that gives me
pleasure), and so forth. Conversely, I can be pleased by the belief that
the pain that I am feeling will lead to pleasure (e.g. when training for
something), that it is becoming less intense (e.g. when recovering from
illness), that it will be beneficial to my health (e.g. when eating
something healthy but disgusting), and so forth. IAH also opens up the
possibility of having past and future events contribute to our
well-being in a way that is difficult to account for in other forms of
hedonism, simply in terms of taking pleasure in something we hope will
happen in the future, being pained by something that happened in the
past, and taking pleasure in the fact that I have been doing something
for more than 10 years.

To further illustrate, consider the difference between getting sensory
pleasure from eating chocolate and *taking pleasure in* eating
chocolate. Only on the latter, attitudinal account are we able to say
that we may not take pleasure in the taste of chocolate for a variety of
attitudinal reasons: because the taste does not correspond to something
real, because it is made by child slaves, because it will lead to
attitudinal pain in the future, because I am thereby breaking a promise
to myself, because it is against the dictates of my religion, or because
I do not trust the person giving it to me. Even if the sensory pleasure
is exactly the same in all situations, the attitudinal pleasure changes
depending on a complex web of beliefs, expectations, moral values,
identity, social norms and so forth. To really push the fundamental
difference between the two, on an attitudinal account it is possible to
have attitudinal pleasure even if you are incapable of feeling sensory
pleasure at all. For instance, someone can take pleasure in the fact
that she is alive after an accident that has left her unable to
experience any kind of pleasure [@feldman_pleasuregoodlife_2004, 56].

More precisely, Feldman [-@feldman_pleasuregoodlife_2004, 66] defines Intrinsic Attitudinal
Hedonsim (IAH) as the theory that:

1.  Every episode of intrinsic attitudinal pleasure is intrinsically
    good; every episode of intrinsic attitudinal pain is
    intrinsically bad.

2.  The intrinsic value of an episode of intrinsic attitudinal pleasure
    is equal to the amount of pleasure contained in that episode; the
    intrinsic value of an episode of intrinsic attitudinal pain is equal
    to - (the amount of pain contained in that episode).

3.  The intrinsic value of a life is entirely determined by the
    intrinsic values of the episodes of intrinsic attitudinal pleasure
    and pain contained in the life, in such a way that one life is
    intrinsically better than another if and only if the net amount of
    intrinsic attitudinal pleasure in the one is greater than the net
    amount of that sort of pleasure in the other.

According to IAH, the pleasures relevant to assessing well-being
hedonistically should be understood as propositional attitudes of
‘taking pleasure in a states of affairs’ rather than as sensations. A
person takes attitudinal pleasure in some state of affairs if “he enjoys
it, is pleased about it, is glad that it is happening, is delighted by
it.” [@feldman_pleasuregoodlife_2004, 56].

This move alone, to be complemented by the notion of ‘confidence’ below,
already allows us to reconsider the EM as an argument against hedonism.
The question then becomes not whether the EM can allow us to experience
pleasure to the same degree as reality, but whether the EM can allow us
to *take pleasure in* activities and experiences to the same degree as
reality. This initially takes care of many of the counter-intuitive
implications of sensory hedonism, in particular those objections that
draw on our intuitions to the effect that experiencing pleasure will in
many cases be detrimental to well-being and experiencing pain in many
cases required for well-being – and that well-being cannot be reduced to
a felicific calculus of the sum of painful and pleasurable experiences.
Although IAH raises many problems of its own – for the further
discussion of which we refer to Feldman [@feldman_goodlifedefense_2002; @feldman_pleasuregoodlife_2004;
@feldman_philosophicalimplicationsempirical_2010;
@feldman_whatthisthing_2010] – the EM intuition that the determinants of well-being must
correspond to something true still remains, even if cast in a new light
by focusing on how this affects our attitudes rather than how these
supposed unreal sensations affect well-being. In order to address this,
Feldman introduces the notion of *adjusted* intrinsic attitudinal
hedonism, according to which the extent to which attitudinal pleasures
determine our well-being is determined by the truth of that in which we
take pleasure. In the subsequent section, we will present and criticize
this notion, and instead present *confidence* as adjusting the extent to
which our well-being is determined by the truth of that in which we take
pleasure.

**IAH and Adjusting for Truth**

Feldman claims IAH is malleable enough to account for the various
objections posed against hedonism and offers an array of ‘adjusters’,
each creating a new variant of Adjusted-IAH (AIAH) to meet the demands
of various thought experiments and other counter-arguments. In the words
of Feldman, “Attitudinal pleasures, unlike sensory pleasures, have
objects. … Attitudinal pleasure is always pleasure taken in some state
of affairs. This feature of attitudinal pleasures makes it possible for
IAH to take many forms, depending upon restrictions that we may place on
the sorts of objects in which attitudinal pleasure is taken” [@feldman_pleasuregoodlife_2004, 71]. Feldman proposes several such restrictions, or
“adjusters”, each intended to target a specific class of objections to
hedonism. In response to EM, ‘Truth’ proposes ‘Truth’ as the relevant
factor in assessing well-being, yielding Truth-Adjusted Intrinsic
Attitudinal Hedonism (TAIAH). The idea is that by adjusting the “raw”
intrinsic pleasure by some factor reliant on whether the pleasure is
taken in a true object [@feldman_pleasuregoodlife_2004, 112], we can get the same
outcomes that Nozick argues for, but from a hedonist theory. The
adjuster is stipulated to affect the well-being that I derive from any
attitudinal pleasure; the more accurately the thing I take pleasure in
actually obtains the stronger it contributes to my well-being [@feldman_pleasuregoodlife_2004, 112,121]. In other words, the reason why we would not want to
plug into the EM is, according to TAIAH, that the occupant of the EM
will have lower well-being than those outside it because the things they
take pleasure in are much less true for the former than the latter.

In adjusted-IAH, the contribution of a pleasure to my well-being is
determined by two factors: the purely subjective intensity of the
pleasure, and the truth-value (in the case of TAIAH) or – to take but
one of the other adjusters offered – the degree in which the object of
pleasure is deserving of being enjoyed (in the case of DAIAH). For
example, suppose “true” pleasures are twice as valuable to my well-being
as “false” pleasures, given the same intensity of pleasure. Now suppose
that learning to master skydiving for me yields intrinsic attitudinal
pleasure of +10 on some scale. Learning it in the Experience Machine
would yield +5 units of well-being since I am not *truly* learning to
master skydiving, but enjoying the experience in the real world would
yield me +10 units.

It seems like Feldman, in trying to defend hedonism against EM, ends up
defending a theory of well-being that is not, strictly speaking, a
hedonist theory at all. Recall that hedonism – and other subjectivist,
mental state theories of well-being – do not allow for anything to
affect our well-being if it does not affect our mental states. In other
words, if two people were to have the exact same mental states their
entire lives, they would have the exact same degree of well-being even
if one of them was accurately tuned to reality and the other was not.
The problem with adjusting for Truth is that something that may not have
any effect on your mental state could still affect your well-being,
which is inconsistent with being a mental state theory. In the words of
Bradley, “The basic intrinsic value states would not be pure
attributions of pleasure, but conjunctions that have a pure attribution
of pleasure as \[only\] one conjunct” [@bradley_fredfeldmanpleasure_2010, p. 234].

Feldman is naturally aware of the problem [-@feldman_pleasuregoodlife_2004, ch. 8] and concedes
that TAIAH goes against the hedonist notion that well-being is
determined entirely by subjective mental states, but not that it thereby
becomes a pluralist or objectivist account of well-being. According to
Feldman [-@feldman_pleasuregoodlife_2004, 19–20]:

1.  <span id="h.1y810tw" class="anchor"></span>No legitimate theory of
    well-being should be able to say that a life I find wholly
    unsatisfying is a\
    life that is going well for me

2.  Pluralist theories state that multiple aspects (such as pleasure,
    knowledge, and virtue), each not\
    reducible to simpler underlying concepts, contribute to well- being

2 3. If I had all these aspects except pleasure to a very high degree, a
pluralist theory would deem my life to be high in well-being

> 4\. It is possible for me to have all these aspects to a very high
> degree, yet still find my life wholly\
> unsatisfying

1,3,4 5. Therefore, pluralist theories are not legitimate theories of
well-being

In other words, Truth cannot in and of itself have any direct effect on
our well-being, but can only exert an influence by adjusting the amount
of well-being we derive from that in which we take pleasure. This still
seems unsatisfactory, however, since it begs the question that truth is
relevant for well-being. If our well-being is fully determined by our
mental states, how is it possible that this well-being is also
determined by whether or not those mental states correspond to something
true? What kind of causality could possibly hold between the truth of
something and its effect on well-being?

To be fair, Feldman is primarily concerned with developing the notion
that hedonism can be adjusted in this manner, without strongly endorsing
any of the many variants he discusses. As we will return to below, the
adjustment idea seems a promising fix for many of the counter-intuitive
implications that often follow from hedonism, but adjusting for *truth*
renders the resulting theory inconsistent, arbitrary and
question-begging. To illustrate this, note that TAIAH would entail that
the well-being of religious people would be determined by whether their
religious beliefs are true or not, regardless of whether they (can) know
this or not. Since at most one (and quite possibly none) of these
religious beliefs are actually true, TAIAH would have us conclude that
those who happen to hold false religious beliefs would *ipso facto* be
less happy than those (if any) who happen to hold true religious beliefs
– and all of this would be regardless of whether the truth of the matter
was known to them. It would follow that if all religious beliefs are
false, then *ipso facto* all religious people would have a much lesser
degree of well-being. This does not only seem counter-intuitive, but
also conflicts with the plethora of empirical research suggesting that
religion is an important constituent of well-being for many people,
regardless of whether those beliefs are true or not [@dworkin_religiongod_2013;
@ellison_religiousinvolvementsubjective_1991; @jackson_howdoesreligiosity_2011; @levin_researchreligionmental_1998; @poloma_religiousdomainsgeneral_1990). To illustrate the absurdity, if TAIAH was an
accurate theory of well-being and if well-being could be (in principle)
measured, it would be (in principle) possible to measure which religion
is most true by comparing the well-being of the different groups of
believers.

Because of these problems, we propose that rather than truth, we should
allow for attitudinal pleasure to be adjusted by ‘confidence’ -- that
the degree to which something in which we take pleasure determines our
well-being is determined by our confidence that it is true, deserved,
morally justified, etc. This yields Confidence-Adjusted Intrinsic
Attitudinal Hedonism (CAIAH), which is in many ways more formal and less
action-guiding than TAIAH but (partly for that reason) avoids the
problems outlined above while still allowing for truth to affect our
well-being. Before turning to the question of how this EM-inspired
revision sheds light on contemporary virtual worlds and “EM-like”
phenomena, we will briefly sketch the key aspects of this theory.[^2]

[^2]: For present purposes, I mean by “virtual worlds” any interactive,
    computer-simulated, indexical, multi-user environment in which
    humans can engage in activities and form relationships by means of
    an avatar or other representation. Well-known examples include
    *Second Life, World of Warcraft* and *EVE online*.

**Introducing Confidence-Adjusted Intrinsic Attitudinal Hedonism
(CAIAH)**

CAIAH builds on IAH (see definition on p. \[CROSSREF\]), incorporating
the adjustment idea to propose a new theory that incorporates the
intuitions from the EM while withstanding the problems of TAIAH. It aims
to describe a substantive hedonist theory of well-being while remaining
within the bounds of hedonism, taking on board only mental states in
both the value base and in the adjuster. Confidence-adjustment of
well-being derived from pleasure aims to do justice to the idea that
pleasures that are experientially the same can in practice contribute
different levels of well-being to your life, but using confidence as an
adjuster does its work by direct effect on mental states. And it does
so, as we shall see in this section, while still explaining our
intuitions regarding how much well-being I derive from the EM, and
showing how we can get the most well-being from our experiences by
arranging matters such that we can be confident about them. In contrast
with TAIAH, CAIAH allows for a range of potentially false yet
confidently held beliefs to be the source of pleasures which yield high
well-being.

When we act with confidence, we act as if what is under consideration is
true (Rotenstreich, 1972, pp. 348,349), even while we know at the same
time to varying degrees it may not be. “Truth” does still play a role,
but only as one of many possible reasons for why you may confidently
take pleasure in something. In the words of Rotenstreich, “the holding
of a thing to be true is an occurrence in our understanding, which,
though it may rest on objective grounds, also requires subjective causes
in the mind of the individual who makes the judgement” (Rotenstreich,
1972, 348). While the external facts of the matter, including whether or
not something is objectively true, may impact our confidence, it is in
fact the subjective causes in the mind of the individual that determine
our confidence, and thereby how much well-being I derive from me taking
pleasure in anything.

The intuitions stemming from EM seem to relate to the reasonable
intuition that in reality, the occupant of the Experience Machine has no
business being confident about his beliefs – or more likely, because we,
from the third-person perspective from which we are asked whether to
plug in, cannot fully imagine ourselves as not having this knowledge
when plugged in. We know that this potential world is not the kind of
world we should be confident about. It would indeed require a level of
unprecedented technological sophistication such as we only see in
fictional accounts like *the Matrix,* to maintain the conditions where
he would have zero grounds for doubt. And if by intuited practical
necessity the reality of the situation would leak through the façade (as
when Neo experiences déjà vu in *the Matrix*), then it seems plausible
he cannot actually be as confident about his attitudinal pleasures as he
would have been in the actual world – the actual world whose existence
we rarely doubt save when engaging in methodological doubt. He can still
take the same pleasure in his activities in the EM, but the well-being
he derives from this pleasure is reduced by the lack of confidence that
the activities are real. One key aspect of CAIAH is that truth *is*
relevant to our confidence, hence our well-being, not in terms of
ontological objectivity (as TAIAH holds) but rather in terms of how our
(implicit) assessment of truth determines our confidence. To clarify
this further, it is helpful to distinguish between different
determinants of confidence and their transitive relation to well-being.

**Cognitive vs. Non-Cognitive Determinants of Confidence**

The main force behind the argument from false pleasures appears to stem
from our experience of how doubts and insecurities can reduce the
pleasure we take in states of affairs, and how hope and confidence tends
to increase the pleasure we take in states of affairs. Conversely, pain
is often alleviated by the hope that the past or current states of
affairs we are pained by are (or will become) untrue – or by the hope
that potentially painful future states of affairs will not come true.
This indicates that Feldman’s move to situate the pleasure adjustment in
the states of affairs themselves is unnecessary; what is at stake is how
our mental states are determined by how confident we are that something
actually is, was, or will become the case. The reason why reduced (or
shattered) confidence is detrimental to well-being primarily stems from
how doubts and insecurities tend to restrict us from truly taking
pleasure in something without reservation. There are also a number of
closely related mechanisms that exacerbate this loss of well-being, such
as the pain felt by the betrayal of others, feelings of stupidity (“I
should have known”), and reluctance to find new sources of happiness –
all of which often accompany lost confidence and well-being.

As with Feldman’s solution in terms of truth adjustment, truth does play
a role in determining confidence, but only as one of many factors.
According to CAIAH, there are a number of other means to justify
confidence and thereby enhance attitudinal pleasures. Some of them are
‘cognitive’ and based on epistemological objectivity, but others are
based on ‘non-cognitive’ means of being confident despite lack of
evidence.

***Cognitive Justifications of Confidence***

As argued by Searle and others [@brey_socialontologyvirtual_2003; @searle_constructionsocialreality_1995;
@searle_socialontologybasic_2006; @soraker_virtualentitiesenvironments_2011], epistemological objectivity can be grounded in both ontologically
objective and subjective states of affairs, where the latter requires a
collective acceptance of a status function. To give an example, the
claim that Barack Obama is the President of USA is just as true (at the
time of writing) as the claim that there is snow on top of Mount
Everest, even though the former is only true because of a collective
recognition that Barack Obama (x) counts as the President (y) in the
context of the United States (c). We can be just as confident about
taking pleasure in Obama’s presidency as in the existence of snow on
Mount Everest. The big difference between these sorts of claims lies in
the way we must go about scrutinizing our beliefs. If I were to verify
that Barack Obama indeed is the president, the method would be different
from how I would go about verifying that there is snow on top of Mount
Everest. For now, it suffices to point out that as long as there is a
method for verifying the truth-value of the states of affairs we take
pleasure in, the confidence of the pleasure can be ascertained on an
epistemologically objective basis.

Furthermore, there are two ways of questioning our confidence. One way
is to investigate the particulars of our life, identify our strengths
and capabilities, be alert to what kinds of things that we take pleasure
in, and so forth. Are you really confident that you (ought to) take
pleasure in x? Another way, which is important in order to avoid
misunderstandings, is to draw on the experiences of others. That CAIAH
as a subjectivist theory of well-being does *not* entail that the
subject is the only source of knowledge about what well-being is. On the
contrary, one of the best ways of questioning our confidence and the
opportunities available to us lies in taking advice from others.[^3]

[^3]: It is on this basis that one of this paper’s authors has, in other
    work [@soraker_valuevirtualworlds_2010], argued that it follows from CAIAH that our
    determinants of well-being can and should be informed by other
    people’s determinants, as can be gleaned from empirical research in
    fields like positive psychology and happiness economics [@jahoda_currentconceptspositive_1959; @ong_oxfordhandbookmethods_2007; @peterson_primerpositivepsychology_2006; @seligman_authentichappinessusing_2004]. A
    further defense of this lies beyond the scope of this essay, but it
    rests on the premise that the kinds of activities and experiences
    that a lot of people take pleasure in are also something that you
    are likely to take pleasure in, meaning that empirical research on
    subjective well-being can provide us with important pointers on the
    attitudinal pleasures of others, which, in turn, may act as
    inspiration for exploring new determinants of well-being or affect
    the confidence we have in existing pleasures \[would be more
    readable as two sentences\].

The central point here is that one way of being confident about our
attitudinal pleasures is to become (more) confident that the states of
affairs we take pleasure in are true. This requires that they are
epistemologically objective, but not that they are ontologically
objective. There are, however, other non-cognitive justifications of
confidence, which we turn to below.

***Non-Cognitive Justifications of Confidence***

As mentioned above, CAIAH does not regard truth in itself as a bearer of
prudential value, but that the truth of something will often determine
our confidence in attitudinal pleasures. However, CAIAH allows for a
number of other routes to confidence, many of which stand in stark
contrast to objective truth:

**Transcendent** **justifications:** We previously argued that one of
the most counter intuitive implications of TAIAH is that it entails that
supernatural and religious beliefs will contribute more to well-being if
they are true than if they are false; that only those whose religious or
non-religious beliefs are actually true can live the best of lives. Many
people find their well-being increased by their religious beliefs and it
seems plausible that this well-being is strengthened by their
unconditional *confidence* in those beliefs, despite lack of
epistemologically objective evidence. Someone who believes that her life
is in the hands of some deity yet is riddled by doubts about the
existence or benevolence of the deity is likely to have reduced
well-being, all else being equal, compared to someone who is entirely
confident that her deity exists and is benevolent.[^4] Whether their
beliefs correspond to true states of affairs is hardly relevant for
their well-being. What determines their well-being is the attitudinal
pleasure they take in the states of affairs, and their confidence that
the states of affairs actually obtain – even if this confidence cannot
be empirically proven,

[^4]: It should be noted that some religions, most notably some forms of
    Judaism, emphasize doubt and skepticism as essential to the
    religion. Although this is far beyond the scope of this chapter, we
    suspect that the role of doubt in such practices is more akin to
    what Paul Tillich refers to as ‘methodological asking’. If so, as
    Tillich so pertinently puts it, “the threat to spiritual life is not
    doubt as an element but the total doubt. If the awareness of not
    having has swallowed the awareness of having, doubt has ceased to be
    methodological asking and has become existential despair” [@tillich_couragebe_2000, 48]

**Trust:** Another means to confidence despite lack of evidence is the
philosophically interesting notion of ‘trust’. Trust can be based on
epistemologically objective states of affairs, such as when we have
overwhelming evidence to the effect that someone is trustworthy because
they have always been in the past. As Lawrence Becker points out,
however, trust – just like confidence – need not be a matter of truth
and evidence:

... let us call trust “cognitive” if it is fundamentally a matter of our
beliefs or expectations about others’ trustworthiness; it is
noncognitive if it is fundamentally a matter of our having trustful
attitudes, affects, emotions, or motivational structures [@becker_trustnoncognitivesecurity_1996, p. 45].

The non-cognitive kind of trust Becker describes is a form of trust
*despite* lack of evidence. As John Weckert points out, this seems to be
the kind of trust involved in many of our closest and most valuable
relationships: “A child’s trust in its parents cannot be explained in
terms of belief alone, nor can that between friends. Young children are
not capable of the right sorts of beliefs. And trust between friends is
also not based on a careful weighing up of risks and benefits” [@weckert_trustcyberspace_2005, 101]. This illustrates how trust can be a non-cognitive basis
for confidence. If I take pleasure in my belief that my wife is
faithful, the confidence I take in this belief will often be more
grounded on the trust I have in my wife than any epistemologically
objective evidence.

The notion of trust as generating confidence and its importance for
well-being is also evident in Niklas Luhmann’s [-@luhman_trustmechanismreduction_1979] influential work
on trust – succinctly summarized by Helen Nissenbaum: “Luhmann
characterizes trust as a mechanism that reduces complexity and enables
people to cope with the high levels of uncertainty and complexity of
contemporary life” [@nissenbaum_securingtrustonline_2001, 106]. Another way of putting it
is to say that trust enables us to pursue experiences we would not have
dared to pursue if it had not been for trust – thus acting as an
important precondition for a fuller and more varied life. In terms of
CAIAH, trust enables me to be confident in my attitudinal pleasures, and
thus (continue to) pursue them even if the epistemic ground for this
confidence is not present.

**Categorical reasons:** Harry Frankfurt, in his *The Reasons of Love
[-@frankfurt_reasonslove_2004],* gives a number of arguments that are, in many ways, tangential
to those supporting CAIAH – and highlights several reasons of love that
go beyond any epistemological doubt. They are ‘categorical’ in the sense
of being unconditional and not subject to scrutiny (or “innate”, as
Frankfurt described them). Frankfurt also stresses the importance of
confidence, and emphasizes that this confidence need not be securely
grounded in epistemological objectivity. For instance, “normal people
are as a rule not at all uncertain concerning whether to care about
their own survival, or about the well-being of their children”
[@frankfurt_reasonslove_2004, 29]. Frankfurt’s term ‘care about’ is in many ways
equivalent to ‘taking attitudinal pleasure in’, so his claim can be
rewritten as an argument to the effect that we are categorically
confident about the pleasure we take in the well-being of our children.
The attitudinal pleasure we take in *their* well-being will determine
*our* well-being in step with how confident we are about our children’s’
well-being. To put it bluntly, the pleasure I take in the well-being of
my children is positively adjusted if I am strongly confident that they
are actually happy and negatively adjusted if I am strongly in doubt
that they are actually happy. This also relates to the aforementioned
problem of how much we should scrutinize our attitudinal pleasures,
since it implies that we should at least (be able to) scrutinize the
well-being of those we care about to some degree. Not having the kind of
relationship with my children that allows me to ascertain their level of
well-being will in most cases erode my confidence in my beliefs about
their well-being, hence my own well-being. My well-being will also be
determined by how confident I am that I really care about the well-being
of my children but, as Frankfurt argues, we “care about such things
without inhibition or reserve ... those commitments are innate in us”
[@frankfurt_reasonslove_2004, 29]. When it comes to the well-being I derive from
my children’s’ well-being, it does not matter whether it is true that I
care about my children or not. What matters is that I am confident that
I should care about my children. If I were able to seriously entertain
doubts whether I cared about them or not, CAIAH stipulates that this
would also negatively impact any well-being I may derive from their
well-being. The same goes not only for parent-child relations, but any
relationship that is founded on more than truth and empirical facts.
This includes ‘love’, to which Frankfurt dedicates his book and argues
that it transcends any such need for justification in terms of ‘truth’.

**Suspension of disbelief:** If transcendent justifications, trust and
categorical dispositions are relatively uncontroversial means of being
confident despite lack of evidence, ‘suspension of disbelief’ is more
contested. The problem with suspension of disbelief (henceforth SOD), is
that on the one hand, it is evident that some of the most rewarding and
universally appreciated sources of pleasure require SOD, including
novels, watching movies and many forms of games. On the other hand,
pleasures based on SOD lie uncomfortably close to pleasures based on
delusion. Making a sharp, conceptual distinction between these two
phenomena is important in order to understand SOD and when it is
justified as a condition for pleasure and corresponding well-being.

The difference can be illustrated by way of Searle’s notion of status
function. As mentioned above, Searle argues that social reality is
constructed by the constitutive rule “x counts as y in context c”. This
means that statements about x and y can only be true in the particular
context c; the belief’s condition of satisfaction lies only in one
particular context. In other words, SOD consists in wilfully neglecting
facts that are only true in one context that are inconsistent with facts
that are only true in another context. Delusion, on the other hand,
consists in wilfully neglecting facts that are true in one context that
are inconsistent with facts that are true in *the same* context. Using
Floridi’s terminology, SOD entails believing facts that are true at one
*level of abstraction* but not at another level of abstraction (cf.
@floridi_methodlevelsabstraction_2008). For instance, it is perfectly rational to believe that
Hamlet is the prince of Denmark in the context of Shakespeare’s play,
even if this requires us to wilfully and temporarily neglect the fact
that he is not prince of Denmark in the actual world. Conversely, it is
*not* rational to believe that Hamlet is the prince of Denmark in the
context of the actual world, because believing this to be true requires
us to neglect facts at the same level of abstraction. Both beliefs are
untrue of actual reality, but only one of them is *about* actual
reality. To put it bluntly, you would only be surprised to find out that
Hamlet is not the prince of Denmark if you were delusional, not if you
merely suspended disbelief for a moment of time.[^5]

[^5]: One way of making these differences more precise could be, as @asheim_mmogontologyhow_2009
    has suggested, to use logical operators to denote
    different contexts. To better describe computer games, Asheim
    introduces L(c), or the *ludic* operator and F(c), or the
    *fictional* operator. Accordingly, if c is ‘Hamlet is prince of
    Denmark’, then F(c) would be true whereas L(c) would not \[hard to
    tell why this is, in the absence of any explanation of what the
    Ludic operator stands for\]. Similarly, we could use a *virtual* and
    an *actual* operator: V(c) and A(c). We are not convinced about the
    usefulness of developing such a logical notation, however, so we
    will not elaborate this further.

Suspension of disbelief cannot only be justified on this basis. More
importantly, it is relatively uncontroversial that we get pleasure from
fictional states of affairs, and few if any would disagree that
fictional states of affairs may contribute to our well-being. Indeed,
living a life without experiences that require SOD would be a life
without literature, movies and other forms of art. Thus, the important
question is not whether we are confident in the suspension of disbelief
itself, but whether we are confident that we will take attitudinal
pleasure in that which requires suspension of disbelief. This is implied
by CAIAH’s recommendation to examine the confidence you have in the
things that you take pleasure in. The implication is that the “burden of
proof”, so to speak, lies with the initial decision to allow oneself to
suspend disbelief, not in the act of suspending disbelief itself. The
question I should ask myself is not whether I am confident that Hamlet
is the prince of Denmark in the context of Shakespeare’s play, but
whether I am confident that I will take pleasure in an experience that
requires me to hold this context-specific belief. The condition for
allowing SOD to be a non-cognitive justification for confident
attitudinal pleasures is that we engage in SOD only on the basis of a
wilful decision to do so, and that we do not suspend facts that pertain
to our particular level of abstraction. This may be the reason why
Coleridge, who coined the expression (Coleridge, 1847), referred to it
as a *willing* suspension of disbelief.

There are plausibly other means of acquiring confidence in one’s
attitudinal pleasures and their objects, but we think the ones we have
discussed are at least the ones most relevant to the intuitions evoked
by the experience machine. The reason we would not plug into the
experience machine, according to CAIAH, as that we cannot imagine
ourselves confidently taking pleasure in something that is only
simulated. The status quo bias is a result of us being more confident
about attitudinal pleasures with which we are already experienced as
opposed to attitudinal pleasures that are directed at a simulation. This
also means that CAIAH bites the bullet when it comes to someone who is
actually inside the EM (or if we unknowingly already were inside the
EM), posing that this will have no adverse effect on our well-being if
and only if our confidence is not affected by the supposed illusory
nature of the EM. It should be clear by now that CAIAH does not easily
allow us to build happiness on delusion. If you were to do so, you would
have to remain confident in the face of typically overwhelming evidence
and without having gone out of your way to avoid such evidence (which
would itself be indicative of doubts), in which case CAIAH bites the
bullet and admits that such a delusional life could be a very happy one.
The key insight, however, is that the *epistemic* \[plausibility?\] of
our beliefs is not always relevant. Being confident about something does
not have to be grounded in epistemological, let alone ontological,
objectivity – and the EM is potentially detrimental to well-being if and
only if you, once plugged in, would be unable to be confident about the
things you take pleasure in.

There is much more to be said about CAIAH, but we hope the short outline
above suffices to show how the EM evokes intuitions that can be used to
refine a theory of well-being, which in turn casts new light on the
thought experiment itself. If we, for the sake of the argument, suppose
that CAIAH (given further clarification and elaboration) is a coherent,
consistent and intuitively appealing theory of well-being, does it come
with any implications beyond the claim that the EM may be as conducive
to well-being as the actual world? In particular, what does CAIAH have
to say about the role that actually simulated reality should have in our
lives. Is it the case, as claimed by so many (see e.g. @barney_vanishingtablecommunity_2006;
@borgmann_internetsolutionproblem_2004; @dreyfus_nihilisminformationhighway_2004; @putnam_bowlingalonecollapse_2000;
@winner_cyberlibertarianmythsprospects_1997), that virtual
worlds – much like the experience machine – are inferior to the actual
world when it comes to well-being? Should we be less confident about the
virtual worlds, entities and experiences from which so many of us
(seemingly) derive well-being?

**From the Experience Machine to Virtual Worlds**

The Experience Machine has not only been used as an argument in
discussions of well-being or politics *per se*, but has also been used
to illustrate several key problems with modern technologies; in
particular, the way in which video games and other virtual worlds are
seen as escapism from the “real world”. To focus on one contested issue,
several philosophers have criticized virtual relationships for being
inferior to actual relationships because they are “unreal” or generally
come without the richness that is necessary for genuine friendship (see
e.g. @cocking_unrealfriends_2000; @froding_whyvirtualfriendship_2012; @kaliarnta_usingaristotletheory_2016;
@parks_makingfriendscyberspace_1996; @soraker_howshallcompare_2012).

According to CAIAH, there is nothing inherently problematic about
virtual relationships, and they can give rise to many of the same
attitudinal pleasures, but virtual relationships are typically inferior
when it comes to the *confidence* they provide. Having lived with
someone and experienced their person in different circumstances – what
Cocking and Matthews refer to as “involuntary self-disclosure” – allows
for a level of confidence that is much more difficult, if not
impossible, in virtual worlds. Almost no matter how much time I spend
with someone in a virtual world, it is hard to imagine (even if not
impossible) how I could become entirely confident that the other person
loves me – which will in most cases remain an obstacle to *confidently*
taking pleasure in that relationship. In most cases, I cannot be fully
confident that my virtual friends are, for instance, the gender, age or
occupation they portray themselves as. To illustrate that this is a
matter of degree, we may be uncertain about all of those in real life as
well, but not as commonly – and decreasingly so when having spent a lot
of time in their presence and engaged in many joint activities. It is
this difference in confidence that *in practice* make actual
relationships more conducive to well-being than virtual ones.

Closely related, and relevant to many online activities, ‘trust’ is not
necessarily grounded in true beliefs, but we are more used to the
expressions, institutionalizations and expectations of trust in the
actual world. In the actual world, I can for instance take pleasure in
the fact that the police are present to secure an event and be fully
confident that wearing a uniform means that they are actually police,
but similarly clear markers of roles and corresponding trust are much
rarer in virtual worlds. To give but one more example of the
implications of CAIAH, the online information glut, including increased
exposure to alternative lifestyles and increased knowledge of the
suffering of others, may lead to reduced confidence in the lives we have
chosen for ourselves. In line with this, several studies have found that
social media platforms like Facebook do affect our subjective well-being
negatively [@haferkamp_socialcomparisonexamining_2011; @kross_facebookusepredicts_2013]. In terms of
CAIAH, social comparison will in many cases leave us with less
confidence about what it is that I (should) take pleasure in, simply by
virtue of constantly being exposed to what seems to be happier lives
filled with attitudinal pleasures very different from mine. Again, CAIAH
captures this insight nicely and shows how it is not the attitudinal
pleasure that is reduced (I do not doubt whether I take pleasure in it)
but rather how confident we are that we *should* be having that
attitudinal pleasure.

There are many more examples of how well-being is a function of
(meta-)confidence and attitudinal pleasure. At the very least, CAIAH
shows that thought experiments like the EM do not have to be read as
pumping the intuition that something must be “true” in order to be part
of the good life. It also steers the discussion towards the question of
what kinds of attitudinal pleasures we can and should be confident
about, which is much less question-begging than simply concluding that
the “unreal” cannot be a source of well-being.

**Concluding Remarks**

The purpose of this chapter has been to show how the Experience Machine
triggers important intuitions about well-being that should be taken
seriously, without thereby accepting Nozick’ s claim that these
intuitions rule out hedonism as a plausible account of human well-being.
We have shown how the EM challenges the way in which hedonism has
traditionally been concerned only with mental states, and hence,
seemingly implies that it does not matter whether those mental states
correspond to something true or real – that it makes no difference
whether we base our well-being on truth or lies, actual or simulated
reality. This is a serious charge because a theory of well-being,
perhaps more than any other normative theory, needs to be intuitively
appealing. We have argued that the problem is at least somewhat taken
care of by first moving towards attitudinal rather than sensory
pleasures, which already entails that well-being depends on, not just
the feeling of pleasure, but also our reflective attitude towards that
in which we take pleasure. Finally, we argued that ‘confidence’ is a
promising candidate for adjusting attitudinal hedonism, one that
subsumes the way in which reality, morality, sustainability, speech
acts, sociocultural norms, trust and other conditions determine the
extent to which that in which we take pleasure contributes to our
well-being – and one that makes sense of the EM intuitions without
thereby jumping to the conclusion that something has to be “real” or
“true” in order to form part of the good life.

**References**

Coleridge, H. N. (1847). *Biographia Literaria* (Google Books ed.). New
York: Wiley & Putnam.^[++Are you sure about this reference? It looks like Coleridge H.N. was only the editor for Coleridge S.T.]
